Update Multipath properties - closes #437 (#512)
ietf-tapswg/api-drafts: draft-ietf-taps-interface.md

resulting Connection cannot use IPv4, as temporary addresses do not exist in
IPv4.

> ### Parallel Use of Multiple Paths {#multipath-mode}

Reviewer: How about "Support for Multiple Parallel Paths"?

Reviewer 2: Or "management of multiple parallel paths"...?

: Enumeration

Default:
: Disabled for connections created through initiate and rendezvous, Passive for listeners

This property specifies whether and how applications want to take advantage of
transferring data across multiple paths between the same end hosts. Using
multiple paths allows connections to migrate between interfaces or aggregate bandwidth
as availability and performance properties change. Possible values are:

Disabled:
: The connection will not allow using multiple paths once established

Passive:
: The connection will not actively try using multiple paths once established, but allow the peer endpoint to initiate using multiple paths and migrate existing connections to other paths.

Handover:
: The connection should only attempt to migrate between different paths when the original path is lost or becomes unreliable.

> The actual thresholds to declare a path unreliable are implementation specific.

Reviewer 3: In #437, @tfpauly writes, as a conclusion from the interim discussion: "Exposing alternate addresses to the peer and actively migrating is likely a separate property that we should specify."  I interpret this as meaning that we don't want "Handover" here. If we do want to keep it, I agree with @gorryfair who, in #437, suggests to call this "Failover" instead.

Author: No, these are still two separate things:
 - Exposure of Alternative Addresses is defined as a separate property below
 - You don't need to expose an alternative addresses prior initiating handover.
 - Servers will most likely never advertise alternative addresses but still want to support the client in migrating.

Maybe make this more explicit that the Multipath property really defines path management behaviour while the exposure property defines advertisement.

Reviewer 3: I saw the Exposure of Alternative Addresses below, and I agree that this is (or can be) separate from "actively migrating". My understanding of the sentence was that both of these things should be a separate property (or are somehow combined into a single separate property).

Author: @tfpauly Do you have a preference?

Author: It makes sense for a client to pick active, as ist allows to initiate additional subflows and, thus, implicitly expose some addresses, but not expose other addresses.
I consider exposing addresses without actively establishing sub-flows rather as a corner-case for things like GPT over SCPT or to bootstrap connection migration through NAT.
Note that I use MPTCP terminology here, but I think this is not limited to MPTCP.

Reviewer 2: You can also be active and only establish connections if a new address is advertised by the peer.

Interactive:
: The connection should attempt to use multiple paths in parallel in order to minimize loss and delay. The actual strategy is implementation specific and  my depend on the multipath protocol used, but should not aim to exceed the bandwidth provided by the best of the available paths.

Passive-Interactive:

> : As Interactive, but only if using multiple paths was initiated by the peer endpoint.

Reviewer 3: I agree with @gorryfair and @abrunstrom who call this "fuzzy" in #437 (this applies to both "Interactive" and "Passive-Interactive". Do we need this now, given that we don't seem to have any RFC explaining how to best implement this?  I think it's cool functionality, but I question whether this should be inside a Transport System - would an application be able to trust this to implement just the right trade-off for it, between e.g. capacity usage and delay minimization?

Side note: if we do keep it, I think the text of this update is better.

Author: This is a slightly extended version of Apple's implementation and can be easily implemented, e.g., for MPTCP by choosing the right path manager. It is a matter of choosing "Just use the lowest RTT path" vs. "use all paths"

Reviewer 3: So if you have a long-RTT path with potentially a lot of extra capacity as well as a short-RTT path, this is always going to pick the short-RTT one?  Even if the capacity on the short-RTT one is quite tiny and the RTT difference isn't very large? Or else, how do you choose these thresholds?  => yes there CAN be a simple implementation, but there are also trade-offs in the design.

Author: I assume this is a weird corner case, but yes there are trade-offs the implementation must make. Do we need text on that?

Reviewer 3: I don't think it's a weird corner case; I just don't think that many applications would want to say "give me the lower latency path, at all cost, no matter how miniscule the difference, no matter how much capacity I lose". I'm not proposing to address this with some discussion in text - I'm proposing not to delegate the algorithm that chooses paths on this basis to the transport system, but leaving it inside the application instead.

Reviewer 4: Leaving it to the application may seem attractive, but is not really feasible in practise as it quickly gets very complicated. For instance, if you ask for a packet to be sent on one path and this packet is lost, are you allowed to retransmit it on another path for reliability? What if the path is lost before you manged to send the packet at all?
I think the updated text is an improvement.

Reviewer 3: Ok, glad to hear that you like this - I don't personally have a strong opinion, and I agree that it quickly gets complicated!  (but that's also why I felt quite insecure about simply delegating this to the transport system). I would like to hear @tfpauly's opinion too, though.

Reviewer 2: I think having "passive" here mixes up two things, one is the question of who will establish paths and the other one is how to use paths. These are separate points and should not be mixed together.

Aggregate:
: The connection should attempt to use multiple paths in parallel in order to maximize bandwidth, possibly trading delay for bandwidth. The actual strategy is implementation specific.

Passive-Aggregate:
: As Aggregate, but only if using multiple paths was initiated by the peer endpoint.

Enumeration values other than "Disabled" and "Passive" are interpreted as preferences.

> 

Reviewer 4: Should this not be other than Disabled. Passive still requires a protocol with multipath support I guess. And should perhaps also say that Disabled is a requirement?

Author: Ack; I'll fix that

: Enumeration

Default:
: Disabled for connections created through initiate and rendezvous, Passive for listeners

This property specifies whether and how applications want to take advantage of
transferring data across multiple paths between the same end hosts. Using
multiple paths allows connections to migrate between interfaces or aggregate bandwidth
as availability and performance properties change. Possible values are:

Disabled:
: The connection will not allow using multiple paths once established

Passive:
: The connection will not actively try using multiple paths once established, but allow the peer endpoint to initiate using multiple paths and migrate existing connections to other paths.

Handover:
: The connection should only attempt to migrate between different paths when the original path is lost or becomes unreliable.
The actual thresholds to declare a path unreliable are implementation specific.

Interactive:

> : The connection should attempt to use multiple paths in parallel in order to minimize loss and delay. The actual strategy is implementation specific and  my depend on the multipath protocol used, but should not aim to exceed the bandwidth provided by the best of the available paths.

Reviewer 3: s/my depend/may depend
and, please: s/bandwidth provided/capacity provided

Passive-Interactive:
: As Interactive, but only using paths established by the peer endpoint.

Aggregate:
: The connection should attempt to use multiple paths in parallel in order to maximize bandwidth, possibly trading delay for bandwidth. The actual strategy is implementation specific.

Passive-Aggregate:

> : As Aggregate, but only if using paths established by the peer endpoint.

Reviewer 3: s/only if using/only using

Enumeration values other than "Disabled" are interpreted as a preference for choosing protocols that can make use of multiple paths. 

> The "Disabled" value implies a requirement not to use multiple paths in parallel but does not prevent choosing a protocol that is principally capable of using multiple paths.

Reviewer 3: I think that "principally" here is a German-ism ... I guess you mean "in principle". However, even this doesn't really add anything useful to the statement, IMO. Can we just remove the word "principally"?

### Exposure of Alternative Addresses {#altaddr}

Name:
: advertises-altaddr

Type:
: Boolean

Default:
: False

> This property specifies whether addresses of other interfaces should be advertises to the

Reviewer 3: s/advertises/advertised

: Enumeration

Default:

> : Disabled for connections created through initiate and rendezvous, Passive for listeners

Reviewer 2: I afraid I don't fully understand this. In case of MPTCP does disabled mean I will not open any new sub flows, reject all sub flows (SYNs) from the other end, or not even include the MPTCP option in the handshake of the initial connection?

Reviewer 2: Or let me put this differently: if multi path support is enabled and a MP option sent in the initial handshake, I think we only need "active" and "passive" as modes because otherwise if I reject all your SYNs why should I even include the MPTCP option in the initial handshake?

Author: We need Disabled here:
- Disabled results in not sending the MPTCP option, 
- Passive results in sending the MPTCP option it but not opening additional subflows.
- Active results in sending the MPTCP option and opening additional subflows

Reviewer 2: Still not sure here because the decision to open a new subflows really depends on the path/interface. Not sure you even want to say: whenever you see a new IP address, immediately open a new subflow. So I think you only want disable and enable here and leave the decision to open new subflows on the interface level.

Author: I agree that we should have some control on the Interface level, but relying on this also for the active/passive path establishment looks to over-complicate things for me.
This Property just controls whether the local side accepts additional incoming sub-flows or whether it also actively tries to establish them. I suspect that this one most applications can easily set:
- Passive in the Server-Case
- Active or Disabled in the Client case
The per-interface one is a major hassle and I believe most programmer really want the implementation to take care here.

What we should discuss is whether we want to make "Passive" also the default for connections created through initiate and rendezvous…

This property specifies whether and how applications want to take advantage of
transferring data across multiple paths between the same end hosts.
Using multiple paths allows connections to migrate between interfaces or aggregate bandwidth
as availability and performance properties change.
Possible values are:

Disabled:

> : The connection will not allow using multiple paths once established and will disable respective functionality in case the chosen transport supports it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
: The connection will not use multiple paths once established, even if the chosen transport supports using multiple paths.
```

Reviewer 3: Okay, sorry, but I must ask: how do you people do this? I can't find how to make such direct text change proposals

Active:

> : The transport system will actively tries, if a to establish additional paths once the inital connection is established if advisable by the {{multipath-objective}} chosen by the application. The desireable paths to established are controlled by the Interface Instance and Provisioning Domain Instance properties (see {{prop-interface}} and {{prop-pvd}}).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
: The connection will negotiate the use of multiple paths if the chosen transport supports this. It will actively bring up paths based on the multipath policy ({{multipath-objective}}) selected by the application, as limited by the Interface Instance and Provisioning Domain Instance properties (see {{prop-interface}} and {{prop-pvd}}).
```

Passive:

> : The transport system will not actively try to establish additional paths once the inital connection is established, but allows the peer endpoint to initiate additional paths and migrate existing connections to other paths.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
: The connection will support the use of multiple paths if the remote endpoint requests it. The connection will not actively initiate the use of any new paths, but will accept paths initiated by the remote endpoint.
```

The objective for using multiple paths is specified using the separate ```multipath-mode property```, see {{multipath-objective}} below.
To enable the peer endpoint to initiate additional paths towards a local address other than the one initially used, it is necessary to set the Alternative Addresses property (see {{altaddr}} below).

Setting this property to "Active", may have privacy implications: It enables the transport to establish connectivity using alternate paths that may make users linkable across multiple paths, even if the Exposure of Alternative Addresses property (see {{altaddr}} below) is set to false.

Enumeration values other than "Disabled" are interpreted as a preference for choosing protocols that can make use of multiple paths.
The "Disabled" value implies a requirement not to use multiple paths in parallel but does not prevent choosing a protocol that is capable of using multiple paths.

> ### Exposure of Alternative Addresses {#altaddr}

Reviewer: Advertisement of Alternative Addresses?

per-Message basis using the Transmission Profile Message Property; see
{{send-profile}}.

### Policy for using Multi-Path Transports {#multipath-policy}

Name:
: multipath-policy

Type:
: Enumeration

Default:
: Handover

This property specifies the local policy of transferring data across multiple paths between the same end hosts if Parallel Use of Multiple Paths not set to Disabled (see {{multipath-mode}}). Possible values are:

Handover:
: The connection should only attempt to migrate between different paths when the original path is lost or becomes unusable. The actual thresholds to declare a path unusable are implementation specific.

Interactive:

> : The connection should attempt to use multiple paths in parallel in order to minimize loss and delay. The actual strategy is implementation specific, but should not exceed the capacity provided by the best of the available paths.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
: The connection should attempt to use multiple paths in parallel in order to minimize loss and delay. The actual strategy is implementation specific.
```

per-Message basis using the Transmission Profile Message Property; see
{{send-profile}}.

> ### Ojective of Using Multiple Paths {#multipath-objective}

Reviewer: Typo on Ojective -> Objective. Beyond that, I'd call this "Multipath Policy" or something similar. Objective doesn't seem like the right word.

Author: This had been my first idea too, but calling it policy does not really tell you whether it is the policy with regards to allowing multipath or the policy how to perform multipath. Objective makes that clear. Any better suggejstions?

Reviewer 5: Sorry Phil, I don't understand "objective" in this context, if we need a word to describe the mode, we need another word.

Reviewer 2: yes objective doesn't seem right. I think policy is fine here.

Name:
: multipath-objective

Type:
: Enumeration

Default:
: Handover

This property specifies the local objective of transferring data across multiple paths between the same end hosts if Parallel Use of Multiple Paths not set to Disabled (see {{multipath-mode}}). Possible values are:

None:

> : Do not use other paths as long as the initial path is available, but allow the peer endpoint to make use it to achieve its objective.

Reviewer: Does this value make sense? It seems like it's a duplicate of Passive; why not just say Passive doesn't use the multi path policy?

Author: This property only effects the packet scheduler, not to the path manager as above. 
As a server, you may choose passive above and "Aggregate" or "Interactive" here.

I am unsure whether we need it, as the difference i see between "None" and "Handover" is really small. In iOS, I would expect it turns off WiFi Assist and does hand-over once a path breaks.

Reviewer 2: I would remove this and only have "handover"

Handover:

> : The connection should only attempt to migrate between different paths when the original path is lost or becomes unreliable.

Reviewer: Rather than unreliable, let's say "unusable". Unreliable could just mean it has some loss—many links aren't reliable, but are good enough to use.

Author: This depends on whether to include "None" or not – if we drop "None", we should change it to unusable, but otherwise, I see more freedom to declare a path "bad enough to hand over to something else".

Reviewer 2: +1 to unusable or another term. unreliable doesn't seem right

The actual thresholds to declare a path unreliable are implementation specific.

Interactive:

> : The connection should attempt to use multiple paths in parallel in order to minimize loss and delay. The actual strategy is implementation specific and may depend on the multipath protocol used, but should not aim to exceed the capacity provided by the best of the available paths.

Reviewer 2: Actually you don't use multiple that _in parallel_ You always just use one but decide to switch over based on latency. I'm also not sure I understand the second sentence. Is that needed?

Author: You may, e.g., to probe/monitor the other paths latency to have a decision criteria when to switch.

Aggregate:

> : The connection should attempt to use multiple paths in parallel in order to maximize bandwidth, possibly trading delay for bandwidth. The actual strategy is implementation specific.

Reviewer 2: Not sure we need this half sentence about "trading delay for bandwidth". If the "needed" capacity is larger than what a single path can provide, there is no other chance than to use both. If you don't want that choose the "interactive" option instead

> Note that the peer endpoint can choose a different objective.

Reviewer: Again, policy rather than objective?
